Now let's talk about abnormalities specific
To the P QRS or T waves
The P wave is really the superimposed deflections of right atrial depolarization followed quickly by left atrial Depot
Polarization
Mb2
Right atrial depolarization causes a positive deflection
And then left atrial depolarization quickly cause II positive deflection
These get combined into one positive lecture
And leave the one right atrial depolarization still cause a positive deflection
Left atrial depolarization actually causes a negative deflect
To the posterior forces moving away from lead V1
Please get combined into a biphasic or like a sine wave
Now imagine that one Atrium becomes enlarged
What would that look like on an ECG
In right atrial enlargement
The first component of the P we will be exaggerated
So the P wave in lead II will the large initial positive deflection due to the enlarged right atrium
Followed by a normal left atrial deflection
The P wave in lead V1 will have a large upward deflection followed by the normal downward deflection
Simply
If the P wave in lead 2 is taller than 2.5 mm you'll right atrium large
Left atrial enlargement is just the office
The second component of the
Z-Wave will be exaggerated
Does
Lead II will show a normal initial upward deflection followed by a larger upper deflection corresponding
The enlarged left atrium
Levy one will show normal initial upward deflection followed by a large downward effects
Simply if the P wave in lead V1 is mostly negative
And greater than 1 mm deep and greater than 1 mm wide
Then you have left atrial enlargement
As a clinical correlate
Mitral valve stenosis is usually a long-term sequelae of rheumatic fever due to group a strep
The stenotic opening caused an outflow obstruction from the left atrium to the left ventricle
Essentially blanket stuck in the left atrium causing to enlarge
The patient may have symptoms of pulmonary congestion and the physical exam May yield an opening snap and diastolic
The ECG shows left atrial enlargement which is consistent with your presumed diagnosis
You now know to get an echocardiogram
Which may show that the patient needs a valve repair
The ECG provided an important clue towards the correct diagnosis
Now let's talk about the QRS complex
Since the QRS complex corresponds to ventricular depolarization
It tells you about ventricular hypertrophy as well as ventricular conduction block
Let's talk about left and right ventricular hypertrophy
In hypertrophic chamber you would expect exaggerated electrical stimulation
The left ventricle is normally much thicker than the Right Punch
So left ventricular hypertrophy
Is really just an exaggeration of normal
Believes that overlay the left ventricle 1 and AVL
Should have enlarged R waves
The leaves that are opposite for left ventricle
V1 and V2
Should show very deep S wave
Of course there are specific criteria for diagnosing LVH
The quickest method which we will call the AVL criteria
Is to measure the height of the r wave in lead AVL
If it is greater than 11 mm tall
Tinnitus diagnostic of LVH
However
If it is less than 11 mm
That still doesn't rule out LVH
Sophie R wave in lead AVL
Is less than 11 mm B of A high index of Suspicion for LVH then you can use the more formal Cornell
Voltage criteria
4 L V8
Count the height of the r wave in lead AVL and count the death of the S Wave in lead V3
And add these values together
In females if the sum is greater than 20 mm
That is diagnostic of LVH
In males the diagnosis requires this song is greater than 28 mm
Take a look at this example
The r-wave in AVL is about 13 to 14 mm above Baseline
So this means criteria for LVH
Right ventricular hypertrophy is the opposite of normal
It should be no surprise that you would see right Axis deviation when the thick right ventricle is dominating the electrical
Vector
Every age is common in pulmonary hypertension
Chronic lung diseases and pulmonic valve stenosis
You should expect at the leads overlying the right ventricle V1 and V2
Will have taller ways
Rvh criteria
Requires either in our way of that
Bigger than S Wave in lead V1
Or an R wave is greater than 7 mm tall and leave the wall
It would not meet criteria if there was a right bundle branch block with a large are Prime with more on that in a minute
As we discussed earlier that transition lead is where the r-wave is taller than s-wave is deep
It normally occurs at lead V3 or before but with rvh
Detransition lead maybe lead V1 or V2
Now it's talk about ventricular conduction blocks
Specifically right and left bundle branch block
If the bundle branches are damaged
Often due to ischemia electrical forces must find a new rap
Teresa destination
Rather than traveling rapidly through the purkinje fibers
The effective ventricles is stimulated by slow myocyte to my side spread from the unaffected ventricle
For example
If the right bundle branch is blocked right ear
The impulse travels rapidly down the left bundle branch
To the left ventricle
I'm from there The Impossible slowly from cell-to-cell to reach the right venture
Left bundle branch block
Is vice versa
Dispose down ventricular depolarization
Crossing the QRS complex
To widen Beyond 0.12 seconds or three small boxes
Is the QRS interval is prolonged
Then you look at the QRS pattern
To determine where the conduction block is located
In right bundle branch block
The average electrical Vector will start in the left side of the interventricular septum and spread to the right
Then the left ventricular depolarization will dominate
Causing the forces to swing for the left
These are the same as in The Normal Heart
However and right bundle branch block the impulse will reach the right ventricle slowly through my site to my site spread
So by the time the impulse reaches the right ventricle the left ventricle is already depolarized
So the rightward forces are unopposed
Causing a final swing to the right
Let's see how that would look
In leads V1 V6
Levy one will have a small positive deflection as the septum depolarizes towards the lead
And then we'll have a large negative
Deflection as the forces swing to the left
Finally over another positive deflection is a vector swings back to the right
This terminal R prime waves
Crucial for recognizing right bundle branch
Best rsr prime wave is known as a bunny ears
Lead V6 will show the opposite
Small negative deflection
Then a positive deflection of
Force of swing to the left
And then another negative
Is the fourth string back to the right
Remember that lead V1 is considered the golden lead when evaluating for conduction block
The actual criteria for right bundle branch block are
Everyone has an rsr Prime pattern where they are prime is greater than the r
And leave V6
Has an order s ratio greater than 1
Let's take a look at this example
The first step is to recognize the QRS duration is prolonged
I count about four small boxes which corresponds to 160 milliseconds
So you know that there is an intraventricular conduction delay
You can see that lead V1 has a tiny aurawave than an s-wave
And then a tall terminal R prime wave
This meets the criteria for an rsr Prime pattern where are prime is greater than our
Then you can confirm by noticing that in lead V6
The r-wave is taller than the S Wave is deep
I recognize in this pattern you can diagnose the conduction delay as a right bundle branch block
Right bundle branch block so generally benign
Do not require treatment
Left bundle branch blocks cause an even more abnormal QRS pattern
Left bundle branch usually causes the interventricular septum to depolarize from left to right
When the left bundle branch is blocked
The right bundle branch
Will depolarize the septum from right to left
This leftward Vector will show up as an initial downward deflection lead V1 and an initial upward to play
The right ventricle is then depolarized raps
This will cause a positive deflection in leave the one and a negative deflection in leave the sex
They're slow my site tomorrow side spread the impulse finally reaches the left ventricle causing the vector to swing back the left
This will show up as a negative deflection 31 and a positive deflection in V6
This translates into the following criteria for a left bundle branch
Lead V1
She show a small R wave in an RS pattern
Or
A QS pattern with a sharp downward swave
Also known as vampire
And lead V6 should have a monomorphic r wave with no Sy
Let's look at this example of left bundle branch
Again first you have to notice it
The QRS interval is prolonged at about 3 and 1/2 small boxes or 140
Lead V1 has a QS pattern with a sharp downward deflection
Weird V6 shows a monomorphic r wave with no s wave
So you're looking at a left bundle branch
Left bundle branch blocks are more clinically significant than right bundle branch block
Left bundle branch block
Cause the normally crisp ventricular contraction to be uncoordinated
Unsynchronized
Which decreases pumping efficiency
If the heart is otherwise healthy this has no clinical significance
But if the heart is already struggling to maintain cardiac output
Then a new left bundle branch block
Can cause a clinically significant decline in cardiac function
A new left bundle branch block requires a cardiac evaluation and symptomatic left bundle branch blocks may require
Pacemaker to better synchronize ventricular contractions
Finally when looking at the QRS complex it is crucial to look for pathologic Q waves
A very high yield Topic in ECG interpretation
As discussed previously
Q waves are defined as an initial downward deflection of the QRS complex
Smokey waves can be normal especially in Leeds V6 and AVL as the septum depolarize away from those
Left lateral leads
However large U waves defined as greater than 1 small box and duration and greater than 25% of the height of the
QRS
Are considered pathologic Q waves
Pathologic Q waves are caused by previously infarcted tissue that no longer conducts electrical forces
Therefore Q waves indicate a prior myocardial infarction
And often persist for the rest of the patient's life
Even if treatment causes successful reperfusion
Often you will find pathologic Q waves on ECG use of patients reporting no cardiac history
The patient may have had subtle symptoms that they ignored or attributed to indigestion
So they have no idea that they have had a heart attack in the past
Simply
Q waves are bad indicate injured and dead heart
And our waves are good and indicate healthy heart capable of conducting electricity
Q waves appear in the specific location of the infarction
An inferior wall Mi due to a blocked right coronary artery
What cause permanent pathologic Q waves in leads 2 3 and avf
Pathologic Q waves tell you not only that the patient has
Previously had myocardial damage
But also which coronary vessel was the culprit
If the Q wave is in an isolated lead only for example in lead 2 but not leaves 3 and avf
Then the Q waves probably not do the previous infarction and can be ignored
Also Q waves are normal in lead AVR
Now let's talk about T wave
If the QRS complex is upright
Then the T wave should be upright as well
If the Q R S and T waves are in different directions such as an upright QRS but a flipped T wave
And that is called a T wave inversion
Walk you waves are permanent signs of an old infarct
T wave inversions are transient sign of reversible ischemia
Patients with chronic angina
May have T wave inversions on their ECG when they are symptomatic
But they may have normal T waves when their symptoms resolved
T wave inversions are quite common and their significance depends on contacts
They may be normal variant
But they also may be an early clue that The myocardium is ischemic
Is important to note
The children often have inverted T waves and leave the V 1 through 3 3
The t-waves in leads V2 and V3 usually become upright by adulthood
But T wave inversions May persist in lead V1 through adulthood which is considered normal
This example shows inverted T waves essentially throughout
Again this does not indicate infarction tissue but transient ischemia
Something you should always be on the lookout for is a tall T wave
Peaked t-waves are associated with hyperkalemia
Which you can see here
Peaked t-waves should be differentiated from hyperacute T waves which are associated with st-elevation MI
We will discuss how to differentiate between peaked and hyperacute T waves in the ischemia module
Finally medical student should know that you wave is an extra deflection after the T wave and usually indicate
Hypokalemia
Other changes with hypokalemia
Include flattening of the T wave and ST segment depression
In this example you can see the T wave here and then this other deflection afterward
That's the new wave